RFC: React Server Module Conventions v2 (#227)
reactjs/rfcs: text/0000-server-module-conventions.md

- Start Date: 2022-10-11
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- React Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

This is a new take on [the original v1 of this proposal](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/189). See the discussion there for deeper context of the reason for the changes made.

Please watch [the React Server Components intro talk](https://reactjs.org/server-components/) and high level [React Server Components RFC](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/188) for some background context on this RFC.

> [React Server Components](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/188) doesn't have much of an API other than integration into meta-frameworks. Instead, we propose that the main way you make choices about what runs on the server and client is defined by its file extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[React Server Components](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/188) doesn't have much of an API other than integration into meta-frameworks. Instead, we propose that the main way you make choices about what runs on the server and client is defined by a directive.
```

We also propose using package.json conditional exports to allow an import to fork its implementation between server and client usage.

# Changes Since v1

- No more file extension conventions.
- A `"use client"` directive at the top of a file defines that it's a boundary between server and client.
- Server and Client Components no longer have to explicitly state so. Everything is implicitly Shared until proven otherwise, and then the build errors.
- `import "server-only"` and `import "client-only"` can be used to poision a module so it can only be imported in that environment.
- TypeScript Convention for enforcing serializable boundaries.

# Basic example

## `"use client"` Directive

```js
// Parent.js

> import Component from "./Component.client.js";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import Component from "./Component.js";
```

function Parent() {
  // Component is of type Reference<T> where T is the type
  // of the default export of Component.client.js
  // Because of this React knows that it can't render it on
  // the server and instead will leave it as a placeholder
  // to later be rendered on the client.
  return <Component />;
}
```

```js
// Component.js
"use client";

function Child() {
  // Component is of type Reference<T> where T is the type
  // of the default export of Component.client.js
  // Because of this React knows that it can't render it on
  // the server and instead will leave it as a placeholder
  // to later be rendered on the client.

>   return <Component />;

Reviewer: Is it worth updating this snippet to `useState` or `useEffect` to better communicate why it's a Client component?

Author: Yea, that makes sense.

Author: Done.

## `"react-server"` conditional exports

```js
// package.json
{
  ...,
  "exports": {
    ".": {
      "react-server": {
        "browser": "./debugger-polyfill.server.js",
        "node": "./native-impl.server.js"
      },
      "default": {
        "browser": "./browser-impl.client.js",
        "node": "./node-polyfill.client.js"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

A package can choose to fork its exports depending the environment it executes in across two dimensions.

The `"react-server"` condition applies only React Server Component environments. However, these can execute either in a `"browser"` during development for debugging purposes, or it can execute in a `"node"` environment in production.

React Client Component environments are the default and they typically execute in a `"browser"` environment but they can also execute in a `"node"` environment for SSR purposes.

Note: This condition can only be used for conditional `imports` within the project itself.

Possible addition: A possible addition to this can be to also support the `"server-only"` condition as a less React specific alternative that could be adopted by other frameworks that also choose this strategy.

> 

Reviewer 2: Tyler_mashburn

# TypeScript Convention

Types between the Server and Client boundary mostly just work because they behave the same as if there was no boundaray. One limitation is that if those types includes a non-serializable type - according to the React Server Components specification, you get an error.

The correct way to model this is to model Client References for exports at the boundaries and then have the callsite of JSX accept a Client Reference as a component and enforce the serialization at the callsite. This ensures that you can still pass client references from server to client in other forms than JSX. In fact, this is how Flow already implements it and it could be implemented in TypeScript too. However, this requires a bit more involved type checking from the TypeScript side.

It's also not necessarily the best enforcement because it doesn't prevent a component from adding a non-serializable prop as inputs unless it can also type check against all possible usages. Which might not be best for error messages and not be viable if you're publishing a shared component that's used in other repos.

Therefore, we propose another convention to files with a `"use client"` directive:

> The conventions apply if a module exports a function that is identified as a React Component, according to some definition specified by the [React Compiler](https://reactjs.org/blog/2022/06/15/react-labs-what-we-have-been-working-on-june-2022.html#react-compiler) and the [Rules of Hooks Lint rule](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-rules.html). Basically if it contains a capital name and containers JSX or Hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The conventions apply if a module exports a function that is identified as a React Component, according to some definition specified by the [React Compiler](https://reactjs.org/blog/2022/06/15/react-labs-what-we-have-been-working-on-june-2022.html#react-compiler) and the [Rules of Hooks Lint rule](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-rules.html). Basically if it contains a capital name and contains JSX or Hooks.
```

In that case, such function's arguments must all be serializable according to the Serialization rules of [React Server Components](https://github.com/josephsavona/rfcs/blob/server-components/text/0000-server-components.md) (basically JSON + Cycles, Binary Data, Promises, JSX etc).

This can be enforced by a framework using code gen, a TypeScript plugin or just built-in to TypeScript. This doesn't need any additional information from the graph to be enforced.

The implications of this is also that you shouldn't add the `"use client"` directive to all Client Components. Only the ones intended to be used directly by the Server. Because indirect ones are still allowed to have non-serializable props.

# Drawbacks

> The main drawback of this new approach is that we further the uncanny valley. It's hard to tell when you jump into any given file whether that is going to get used as a Shared, Client and Shared component. That's the big downside of the whole Server Components design that we're taking a bet that it's worth learning this one thing to unlock its possibilities. To help combat this, we'll also propose that, as a convention Server Components are mostly written as "Async Functions" form instead of "Hooks Functions". More on that soon. While Shared and Client Components would be written as "Hooks Functions". This distinction is not enforced though.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main drawback of this new approach is that we further the uncanny valley. It's hard to tell when you jump into any given file whether that is going to get used as a Shared, Client and Server component. That's the big downside of the whole Server Components design that we're taking a bet that it's worth learning this one thing to unlock its possibilities. To help combat this, we'll also propose that, as a convention Server Components are mostly written as "Async Functions" form instead of "Hooks Functions". More on that soon. While Shared and Client Components would be written as "Hooks Functions". This distinction is not enforced though.
```
